.Dd Feb 22, 2026
.Dt JSON-CANVAS 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm json-canvas
.Nd deterministic Markdown-to-NDJSON compiler and mnemonic-manifold emitter
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl v
.Op Fl -version
.Ar command
.Op Ar args ...
.Pp
.Nm
.Cm md extract
.Fl -root Ar DIR
.Fl -out Ar DIR
.Op Fl -mode Ar MODE
.Op Fl -langs Ar LIST
.Op Fl -strict
.Op Fl -aggregate | Fl -no-aggregate
.Op Fl -loose-ndjson
.Op Fl -canon-filter
.Op Fl -emit-canvas-pointers
.Op Fl -emit-manifest
.Op Fl -manifest-path Ar PATH
.Op Fl -include-git-head
.Op Fl -timestamp
.Pp
.Nm
.Cm md verify-evidence
.Op Fl -in Ar PATH
.Op Fl -root Ar DIR
.Op Fl -strict | Fl -no-strict
.Pp
.Nm
.Cm mnemonic-manifold emit
.Fl -in Ar PATH
.Fl -out Ar PATH
.Op Fl -emit-static | Fl -no-emit-static
.Op Fl -strict | Fl -no-strict
.Op Fl -centroid
.Op Fl -manifest Ar PATH
.Op Fl -build-root-sha256 Ar HEX
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
is a deterministic, proof-carrying compiler pipeline that lowers Markdown corpora into canon NDJSON,
projects clauses onto the mnemonic-manifold Fano execution surface,
and emits replayable Canvas NDJSON events.
The tool is content-addressed, auditable, and strict by default.
.Pp
The pipeline is typically:
.Bl -enum -compact
.It
Extract records from a Markdown corpus into per-file NDJSON plus an aggregate stream.
.It
Attach deterministic byte-span evidence to every emitted record.
.It
Optionally emit a content-addressed build manifest with a single root hash.
.It
Emit mnemonic-manifold events for visualization and replay.
.El
.Sh COMMANDS
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Cm md extract
Walk a directory tree of Markdown files and extract structured records from fenced code blocks and optionally loose JSON object lines.
.It Cm md verify-evidence
Verify extracted records by re-reading source bytes and checking that
evidence spans parse to the same JSON objects (ignoring injected
.Cm evidence
or
.Cm evidence_md Ns ).
.It Cm mnemonic-manifold emit
Read canon NDJSON records and emit Canvas NDJSON events for the mnemonic-manifold projection.
.El
.Sh "GLOBAL OPTIONS"
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl v , Fl -verbose
Verbose output.
.It Fl -version
Print version and exit.
.El
.Sh "MD EXTRACT"
.Ss Inputs
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl -root Ar DIR
Root directory containing Markdown sources (typically
.Pa docs/ Ns ).
.It Fl -out Ar DIR
Output directory. The extractor writes subdirectories such as
.Pa ndjson/
and
.Pa canvas/ Ns .
.El
.Ss Extraction scope
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl -mode Ar MODE
Extraction mode.
Supported values:
.Cm ndjson-only
or
.Cm all Ns .
Default:
.Cm ndjson-only Ns .
.It Fl -langs Ar LIST
Comma-separated fence languages to extract (case-insensitive).
Common values:
.Cm ndjson ,
.Cm jsonl ,
.Cm jsonlines ,
.Cm json ,
.Cm hash ,
.Cm canvas Ns .
.Pp
Note:
in
.Cm ndjson-only
mode, the implementation only emits
.Cm ndjson/jsonl/jsonlines
even if other values are included.
.It Fl -aggregate
Write an aggregate NDJSON stream to
.Pa out/ndjson/all.ndjson Ns .
.It Fl -emit-canvas-pointers
Emit pointer records to
.Pa out/ndjson/canvas.blocks.ndjson
for extracted
.Ql ```canvas
fences.
Pointer hashing is
.Cm sha256
over the raw fence bytes.
.El
.Ss Strictness and filtering
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl -strict
Fail on malformed inputs (including unclosed fences and invalid JSON in extracted blocks).
.It Fl -loose-ndjson
Additionally parse standalone JSON object lines outside code fences using a conservative heuristic.
.It Fl -canon-filter
Emit only records compatible with
.Cm mnemonic-manifold\ emit\ --strict
(e.g. SPO clauses, nested SPO, supported event records, and hash records).
.El
.Ss Evidence
Every emitted JSON object is augmented with deterministic provenance evidence.
Evidence spans are UTF-8 byte offsets into the source Markdown:
.Cm span_start
(inclusive) and
.Cm span_end
(exclusive).
If the input record already contains
.Cm evidence ,
the extractor preserves it and adds
.Cm evidence_md
for the Markdown span evidence.
.Ss Manifest
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl -emit-manifest
Write a content-addressed manifest JSON documenting inputs, outputs, config, and tool identity.
.It Fl -manifest-path Ar PATH
Manifest output path. Default is
.Pa out/manifest.json Ns .
.It Fl -include-git-head
Include Git HEAD resolution as optional metadata.
In strict mode, failure to resolve HEAD is an error.
.It Fl -timestamp
Include a deterministic build time sourced from
.Ev SOURCE_DATE_EPOCH Ns .
If unset or invalid, this option fails.
.El
.Pp
Manifest schema version is
.Cm ulp.manifest.v0.2
and includes
.Cm root_sha256
computed as sha256 over the canonical manifest bytes with the
.Cm root_sha256
field omitted; the manifest file is newline-terminated.
.Sh "MD VERIFY-EVIDENCE"
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl -in Ar PATH
Input NDJSON to verify.
Use
.Sq -
for stdin.
.It Fl -root Ar DIR
Docs root directory used to resolve
.Cm evidence.doc_path Ns .
.It Fl -strict
Fail on the first mismatch or missing evidence (default).
.It Fl -no-strict
Skip records that cannot be verified (missing evidence, missing source file, parse failures).
.El
.Sh "MNEMONIC-MANIFOLD EMIT"
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl -in Ar PATH
Input canon NDJSON (typically
.Pa out/ndjson/all.ndjson Ns ).
.It Fl -out Ar PATH
Output Canvas NDJSON events (e.g.
.Pa out/mnemonic-manifold.events.ndjson Ns ).
.It Fl -emit-static
Emit static Fano point/line nodes and feature anchor nodes.
.It Fl -strict
Require strict canon decoding.
.It Fl -centroid
Emit closure observer data (integer counts) for each clause projection.
.It Fl -manifest Ar PATH
Load a manifest and emit a build identity overlay edge (edge-only feature) using the manifest root hash.
.It Fl -build-root-sha256 Ar HEX
Provide a build root hash directly (hex). Overrides or substitutes manifest loading.
.El
.Pp
Raw-string hashing is preserved (e.g.
.Qq X ,
.Qq [X] ,
and
.Qq [[X]]
are distinct identities), while bracket reference semantics are represented as edge-only overlays.
.Sh ENVIRONMENT
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Ev SOURCE_DATE_EPOCH
Required when
.Fl -timestamp
is enabled for manifest emission. Must be a base-10 integer.
.El
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Pa out/ndjson/*.ndjson
Per-file extracted NDJSON streams.
.It Pa out/ndjson/all.ndjson
Aggregate extracted NDJSON (when
.Fl -aggregate
is set).
.It Pa out/ndjson/canvas.blocks.ndjson
Canvas pointer records (when
.Fl -emit-canvas-pointers
is set).
.It Pa out/canvas/*.json
Extracted canvas blocks written as JSON files (when
.Fl -mode all
and
.Cm canvas
is included in
.Fl -langs Ns ).
.It Pa out/manifest.json
Build manifest (when
.Fl -emit-manifest
is set).
.El
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.Ex -std
.Sh EXAMPLES
.Ss Extract docs to NDJSON with manifest and canvas pointers
.Bd -literal -offset indent
cabal run json-canvas -- md extract \\
  --root ../../docs \\
  --out ../../build/docs \\
  --mode all \\
  --langs ndjson,jsonl,jsonlines,json,hash,canvas \\
  --strict --aggregate --loose-ndjson --canon-filter \\
  --emit-canvas-pointers --emit-manifest
.Ed
.Ss Verify evidence spans
.Bd -literal -offset indent
cabal run json-canvas -- md verify-evidence \\
  --in ../../build/docs/ndjson/all.ndjson \\
  --root ../../docs \\
  --strict
.Ed
.Ss Emit mnemonic-manifold events with build identity
.Bd -literal -offset indent
cabal run json-canvas -- mnemonic-manifold emit \\
  --in ../../build/docs/ndjson/all.ndjson \\
  --out ../../build/docs/mnemonic-manifold.events.ndjson \\
  --emit-static --strict --centroid \\
  --manifest ../../build/docs/manifest.json
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr mandoc 1
